Hell everyone, welcome back to Exploring
Quantum Physics, I'm Charles Clark.
And now we're going to wrap up the
connection between the angular momentum of
the Runge-Lenz
Vector that we saw in a previous lecture,
and use that to describe the spectrum of
hydrogen.
So I hope you remember from lectures in
the past week, we derived
this new con, constant motion for the
hydrogen atom.
Unusual tide to run the lens vector, which
is really
the cross product, of the momentum and the
angular momentum.
And the radial vector, and this, this lies
in the same plane as
the, the radius.
Same plane as the position and the
momentum, classically.
And def-, defi-, it, it serves to define
the elliptical orbit that
the electron and the nucleus make about
the center of the mass.
Well, the classical definition is, is
asymmetric in p and L.
And precocious young scientist Wolfgang
Pauli, devised a symmetrised form.
And he's, he, he takes the mass out and,
and puts it in a different area.
So as you an see, this,
this m factor that Pauli that Pauli
derived, is identical up to an overall
constant to the
Runge-Lenz Vector that we derived, but it
has a nice symmetric form.
That is required by quantum mechanics.
Well, I invite you to give your opinion on
that in the, in the video quiz.
Now, the central result found by Pauli,
and
it's, it seems mysterious and miraculous
to me.
It has to do with the commutators of
the angular momentum operator the run the
lens vector.
So you have already derived this, and
since
since M is a vector valued operator it is,
it, it, you, this, this is this is a
consequence, this is the, this is the
common
commutator that applies when the angular
momentum Operators apply to any vector.
But now here's the the new one.
And
I am not going to go through a
step by step derivation because it's a
lengthy one.
But
as you can see from a, from the, from the
mechanical point of view this just
involves it now involves the M.
The M has products of
p x p.
There are triples of momenta and, and
coordinates in his expressions.
so it's lengtly but, when it is done
this, this is the answer.
And as we'll see, these these identities
make it possible to find the bound
state energies of all solutions of the
hydrogen atom, without actually solving
the Schrodinger Equation.
Now, first I'm going to talk about the
spectrum
that's associated with the angular
momentum operator itself.
It's very important, and I'm going to
outline the
derivation here just because for, in the
interest of time.
But it's something that you can do
yourself.
I've done it.
And Zach has written, Zach Raines has
written
up some nice notes, that sort of take you
step
by step through that.
So the first, the first observation is
that since L3 and
L squared commute, and there's nothing
important about L3 here but
it's we know that, that L3, L1 and L2 do
not
mutually commute, though each one of them
commutes with L squared.
So we're going to pick, we just, by
convention
we pick L3 to be we're, we're going to,
we're going to make Eigenfunctions that
are Eigenfunctions, both of
l squared and of L3, because we can choose
to have Eigen functions that have both
those Eigenvalues simultaneously.
So we'll call these by convention lm and
L3|lm.
Is
is, is just the eigenvalues denoted by
this.
Now, it will turn out that l is equal to
0, 1, 2, and so on, integer.
And then m is equal to minus l, minus l
plus 1, et cetera, up to
l, but for the moment, we'll just, we'll
just leave it undetermined like that.
Okay, now, in order to prove the spectral
property
this, this is the spectral property of the
eigenvalue operator.
It's relat-, it's straightforward to prove
it if you define these two operators.
L plus and l minus.
These are sort of like, they resemble, to
some
degree, the creation annihilation
operators
of the harmonic oscillator problem.
So, you can readily verify this identity.
Because, you know,
it, we're just saying you've previously
established that, for example, L3
commutator L1 equal i h bar L2.
so it's, it's quite straightforward to
verify
that this, this identity, which
says for example when you, when you, when
you
go, when you apply, when you take this,
and you now say alright,
let's apply L plus or L minus to this lm.
Is it an eigenstate of L3?
And indeed it is.
But it has its
eigen, its, its, its eigenvalue of L3 is
increased by plus or minus 1
times h bar.
So, in other words if you, if you,
if you start, whatever this state may be,
Lm, if you start with Lm,
then you get a sequence.
So this is the value of L3 here.
You get a sequence of equally spaced
values of, of L3.
So the, this is an example of a
ladder operator, that's somewhat analogous
to the creation/annihilation operator.
it generates a sequence of Eigenstates
with equally-spaced Eigenvalues.
Well the full analysis requires that this
this sequence terminate at some point.
Because if L squared has a fixed value,
that means there's a maximum value of the
maximum
eigenvalue for any one of it's components.
And that,
that yields that analysis yields the
following result,
that the spectrum of the angular momentum
operator it's L squared.
The eigenvalues of the form l times l plus
1 where l is any nonnegative integer,
so zero to six, et cetera.
Now there's a widely used,
system of eigenfunctions of the angular
momentum operator.
these are called spherical harmonics.
Here's a, here's an appropriate reference
for their properties.
And they're expressed in spherical
coordinates so basic, if
you have a func, a function in three
dimensional space
the, the spherical harmonics are used to
paramatize the angular dependance.
So by convention this is, this is x3, the
z coordinant.
phi is the, is the as it moves the angle
theta, the conventional polar angle.
And here is a, an image that shows the
various the various so
for l equals 0, there's m equals 0 only.
For l equal 1 there's
m equal plus 1, 0, minus 1, and so on.
Now
I think it's useful to keep in mind that
Ylm
is, is basically a polynomial.
Of
degree
l, divided by r to the l.
So all, all
these, these functions, I mean, their,
their expressions
can get pretty complicated, but you can
always think of them as polynomials.
So for example, Y 0 is 1 over root 4 pi.
It's just a constant, it's just a constant
function.
y 1 0 and minus 1 are Well,
y one zero, is proportional
to cosine theta, which is,
so it's proportional to c o for
all r, and y 1 plus or minus 1
are proportional to x plus
or minus iy over r.
So they're they're,
the, the things that, the most problems
you encounter just deal
with fairly small values of l, whereas the
the the spherical
harmonic functions are rather simple, but
they're very powerful sets.
And they're often, they're widely used in,
in many
applications in physics and mathematical
analysis.
Now, it turns out, to get back to the the
angle Runge-Lenz
vectors.
These operators, L and M together, let's
just think about the balance states of
either for the motion.
Together, they're the generation, they
provide the
generators of a rotation proof in four
dimensions.
So, the hydrogen
atom, has an internal symmetry, which
is like the symmetry of an object that has
a
particular transformation under rotations
in a space of four spacial divisions.
it's quite extraordinary that such a deep
relationship exists.
Now I don't think it's possible in, to
make a interpretation of that fourth
spacial dimension.
That's something that exists like one of
the three spacial dimensions with which
we're familiar.
But it is striking that this, this very
basic dynamical system, the hydrogen atom,
the simplest atom, has this very
rich and symmetric structure with a high
degree of degeneracy.
So for for a given, for a given
value of, of principal quantum number.
Let's say N is equal to n, n plus
l plus 1.
There are
N squared states
with the same
energy.
So this degeneracy
receives, I think, spectacular
confirmation in this data for
the molecular cloud that we saw in an
earlier lecture.
So this frame shows absorption by states
in a molecular cloud with an N value of
600.
And the, there are, there are basically,
something like 300 and,
for, for, in this region there are 350,000
states with the same energy.
And there, well there are 350,000 states
in
this vicinity and you see sharp lines here
and these are, according to our best
understanding
of the system, those states are all
equally populated.
So you're seeing the sharp ringing.
All of these hundreds of thousands of
states
are making transitions at exactly the same
frequency.
It is really, it's really quite a
remarkable thing.
Indeed, without this high degeneracy of
the these are actually
carbon like atoms with a with highly
excited electrons that are hydrogenic.
Without that exact degeneracy, we wouldn't
see these signals at all.
So we're going to conclude for the moment
there, and
then proceed in the next lecture with some
discussion
of more applications of angular vectors.
Hope to see you then.